the country William Greider author of
secrets of the temple your book is
subtitled how the Federal Reserve runs
the country have we been wrong to think
it was the politicians all along at
least half wrong yes
strange as it seems the without going
into all the esoterica of what the
Federal Reserve the central bank
actually does in the largest frame it
regulates money and interest rates and
that is a is one of the most immediate
and powerful influences that the
government has over the real economy
workers producers stores etc simply by
manipulating the price of money which
inevitably changes the price of almost
every other transaction and it's
insulated from the politicians quite
deliberately so yes your the notes on
the book jacket suggested in some ways
the Federal Reserve is quoting the
jacket now is more secretive than the
CIA and more powerful than the President
and Congress is that really sounds
sounds grandiose I know but I think
that's right I thought about that a long
time and it it is like the CIA in many
ways in that it's run by a community of
experts technocrats who have skills and
knowledge which are not generally
available its secrecy is is even greater
than the CIA's in the sense that the CIA
at least has to go to the Congress on a
fairly regular basis
share its plans with the Congress albeit
in secret meetings of the Intelligence
Committee get an annual appropriation
which is a powerful lever with Congress
doesn't like what the CIA is doing in
Nicaragua it says thou shalt not spend
money for this the Federal Reserve has
none of those controls the Federal
Reserve is required to testify regularly
before Congress but it is not required
to reveal its secret deliberate
deliberations or even its
it's real expectations for what's going
to happen to the economy and more
importantly it makes its own budget it
does not submit to the appropriations
process that every other agency of
government must submit to and as the
Federal Reserve
well understands that's real power and
real protection from from both
presidents and Congress is that power
something that evolved or was it given
that power from day one yeah I think
well it did evolve and I you know who
knows but it's it's survived for 75
years without any really fundamental
reforms that that took away its its
independence on the other hand it's hard
to believe that if you created this
animal today and submitted it to
Congress that they would approve it in
its present form what happened is that
it was created back in 1913 with what
people believed at the time were fairly
limited and mechanical functions there
was rigidities in the money supply which
produced periodic catastrophes and the
idea was to create a more flexible
system that would that could feed in
into the money supply periodically to to
just become more elastic was the phrase
they used at that time what the Fed
discovered quite haltingly over a period
of two decades was that the power to do
that was really the power to manipulate
the whole economy and that is to
stimulate or restrain and that its
actions fed directly into interest rates
in financial markets all over the place
and from financial markets into the
transactions of labor business consumers
and so forth that wasn't instant
knowledge on anybody's part and as they
grasped that nobody had sufficient cause
to say well wait a minute that ought to
be done by somebody else or it ought to
be done
more democratic manner and in addition I
think both political parties understood
that this is really the fulcrum between
debtors and creditors between the people
with a lot of wealth and the people with
none between labor and capital
it's a very deep political transaction
that goes on in this management of money
and so the compromise which was struck
in 1913 held over the over many years oh
and there have been many fluctuations in
that but basically no one since and then
the Fed has had critics on both sides
liberal conservative Republican
Democratic but no one sense has ever
been able to put together a powerful
enough coalition to undo it another
quote from your book you say the Federal
Reserve System was the crucial anomaly
at the very core of representative
democracy why why was it an anomaly and
why has it become so crucial
well it's anomaly it's an anomaly
because our Civic mythology tells us
that people are sovereign that the
people ultimately choose their
representatives and that those
representatives must be accountable in
regular times that's why we have
elections every two years for the
federal government every four years for
the president the Federal Reserve is
exempt from that process and yet it has
enormous political power those who
believe the mythology would say oh well
that's not quite right because this is
just a technical function it's not
politics well when I
I mean I think that's rubbish because
it's political in the sense that here is
an agency making very large public
choices for us that will reward some
interests and damage other interests
that may not be their motive in doing it
but that's the result that's that's
political in the deepest meaning of the
word and when you go behind the
economics of the Fed and and look at
what you know which choices they make
whether you agree with them and disagree
with them what you really under what you
really come to see is that these are
choices of values Paul Volcker has a
certain
set of values which he brought to
government in and imposed quite
successfully and you can argue that the
country on the whole supported those
values but the people who were damaged
the victims from both the deep recession
and from from the bonny money policy
that followed have no access to express
their grievances there's no recourse I
mean they could they can write angry
letters to the Fed which they do or they
can call their congressmen and their
congressmen is likely to tell them well
yes isn't the Fed terrible but we can't
do anything about it and and all I'm
suggesting is that this there's
something wrong in a system that's
that's sequestered with that much power
then I would just add in passing the
word anomaly stops people and I first
heard that used by a former president of
a Federal Reserve Bank I mean they
understand that perfectly they did but
that it's an anomalous situation and
they defend it for lots of different
reasons but you mentioned Paul Volcker
in your book that focuses on him quite a
bit in your book you say that his
appointment was the most important
appointment of Jimmy Carter's presidency
and you have a line under Paul Volcker
would go on to seize control of events
and force them in a direction of his own
choosing that was one person able to do
that
well the institution the Federal Reserve
but he he provided the leadership and
what happened in very simple terms was
an inflation in the summer of 1979 was
running well into double digits there
was a lot of sort of runaway speculative
line of art real estate gold was going
toward 850 dollars an ounce and the
Carter Administration was deep in its
own political problems including a kind
of sense of confusion about what to do
about any of this
Carter appoints Volcker in July August
of 79 two months later
despite objections and
please from the White House he imposes
in October 6 1979 a new monetarist
regime of the Fed which which is without
going into the complications basically
said we're gonna hold the money supply
at a steady string level regardless of
what happens to interest rates knowing
of course that interest rates would go
through the roof
and also really regardless of what
happens to the real economy and that's
power and and Carter was in such a
weakened position at that point in his
presidency that even though they didn't
like it at the White House they could
not object and it was a very subtle
political transaction but everybody
involved knew what was happening he book
starts in the late 70s but it gets into
the eighties during the Reagan
administration and President Reagan came
in on a on a large wave of popularity
and yet but goes on to say that the
awkward political secret of the 80s is
that while the public blamed Reagan it
was Volcker who was actually running the
economy even President Reagan was was
unable to affect Fed policy yeah and
there two elements to that Volkers
objective which is to hold things down
including presumably a recession until
this upward curve of inflation is broken
he is he is in the midst of that without
having made much progress when Ronald
Reagan comes to office and Ronald Reagan
introduces an alluring but contradictory
idea of how this can be done he says we
will stimulate the economy with these
huge tax cuts increased defense spending
so forth and that's gonna make everybody
robust and healthy again at the very
time we urge the Federal Reserve to go
further and do exactly what Paul Volcker
wants to do which is to tighten money
and you don't have to be an economist to
understand that there's something wrong
in that formulation how do you get go up
with an economy at the very time you're
holding it down and that's set up a
collision between the Fed and the rest
of government that is endured to this
day and it literally is a collision of
purposes
and I I call it a phrase I borrowed from
a Fed economist it's a game of chicken
between the two sides of government and
invoker really won that game with icing
disastrous consequences but I mean
they're at least severe damage but in
any case as a matter of will as a matter
of political strength and fortitude and
skill he won that and and when you've
got past the recession of 1981-82 then
the White House particularly looking
forward to the 1984 election changes its
its outlook dramatically and says for
God's sakes get out of the way with
tight money let's just let this economy
roar and that's when that's when Volcker
and Reagan are really in very direct
conflict it's it's played out in sort of
oblique public terms so that there's
it's not the sort of argument and battle
that you see in Congress where the White
House says one thing and the House
Speaker says something contrary that and
you you have a public argument these are
these are much more subtle and you have
to really know the language of discourse
before you can follow the outline of the
argument but it's a very serious
argument and and basically Volcker won
this collision you talked about is
that's only based on the personalities
involved or is this going to be is this
institutionalized with us for years to
come
well I think it's institutionalized and
I and I hope this is what people get out
of my book it's not about was Paul
Volcker a good guy or a bad guy or even
whether Ronald Reagan was smart or dumb
or whether his policies made any sense
it's it's like what I saw in my long
study of this this whole area is that we
have this we have the government design
in a way that guarantees this collision
one way or another and what it produces
is not stability which was the original
idea you know the we have this balance
where the Fed gets strict and holds good
things back Congress and the president
are the boomers and they want to go
forward and so these two would sort of
balance
that isn't what happens what happens in
real history is that one side gets
control and goes to an extreme then the
other side gets control and it goes to
an extreme and if you think back over
the last 25 years that's what's happened
in our government first we had this sort
of Congress and a series of presidents
not just Lyndon Johnson but a number of
his successors who really want to do
more than they can pay for and so forth
and so on they want flight wars or
whatever and that produces a decade or
more of runaway inflation then the Fed
finally gets control and once they are
on top they won't let go and instead of
going for a more gradual balanced
amelioration of inflation they drive
things really hard really down hard and
and that has consequences which we are
still faced with I mean it starts in
Iowa if you've been the most obvious
sense but it's also Mexico which is deep
trouble and a lot of corporations that
are in deep trouble not to mention
consumers but the my argument in the
book is that you've got to find some
mechanism to marry those two policies
fiscal policy and and monetary policy
that it is that it is insane for the
federal government to try to manage the
economy with these two independent power
centers that don't have to talk to each
other even in them in any real sense and
and when I say that I'm fully aware that
that's a that's another way of saying
you have to you have to eliminate the
independence of the Federal Reserve
following that up you you relate an
exchange at a hearing in your book
between senator Byrd and mr. Bolger
where senator Byrd asks the question
something to the effect of who are you
responsible to mr. Volker responds
saying well Congress created us you can
uncreate us if Congress doesn't like
what the Fed is doing can't they do
something about it sure that by the mean
and Volcker who is a very astute
politician said that with it with a with
a little curl in his
in his words because he knows perfectly
well that Senator Byrd does not have the
political power to sell that to Congress
and they and one of the things that
played out through the eighties was the
struggle of who of who really is going
to discipline whom and in that sense
Congress could wipe out the Fed tomorrow
but you've got to put together a broad
enough coalition that wants to do that
and I think unless something very
dramatic and violent happened to our
society I think that's not likely we're
talking with William Greider he's author
of secrets of the temple now the Federal
Reserve really runs our country the
title secrets of the temple where does
that come from well it's an allusion to
a seam a sub-theme that I have
throughout the book which is that money
and for that matter economics has
religious properties that are both moral
and also metaphysical in a way and it's
not it's not simply quaint and
accidental that money was first coined
in the temples of all the classical
civilizations and the Fed even though it
is a very highly rationalistic
institution with lots of mathematical
equations and economists and so forth
what one would think is that is the
opposite of religious actually cloaks
itself in in in much of the same style
and in thought processes I mean I run
through just a couple of them were the
mystique of the central bank is it
phrase that the that's used even by fed
people quite unconsciously of what that
suggests is so there's some mystery
going on here and secondly the Federal
Reserve Board though it does it in a
prosaic way has the same role of ancient
temple priests which is that is a
prophetic leader that says this is how
we think the future looks this is
what we think will happen to the economy
and and that's that's a kind of prophecy
making that that that the Fed does just
as as ancient temples did
and finally the money itself has a very
complex and an almost frightening bundle
of psychological spiritual meanings
around it I mean you said tucked it
talked to somebody who wants the gold
standard restored and chances are they
will say the gold is is a version of
God's money that's the way God intended
it to be
and you're sort of saying what is it one
how did God get into this well God has
always been very close to money with as
secretive and mysterious as you said the
Fed is was it easy to get people to talk
about it was it easy to find the
information needed to write this book
yeah I think I mean easy it's those five
years of hard work but but in terms of
the shoe mean they were fairly
cooperative what I what I did discover I
spent a lot of time in the heart of my
reporting was interviewing Federal
Reserve Board governors presidents of
the twelve Federal Reserve banks and the
Chairman I found them pre
straightforward they didn't tell me
their deepest secrets but they but they
answered my questions in a very
straightforward way I found this the Fed
staff with some some notable exceptions
but particularly here in Washington much
more reluctant to be sort of open and
straightforward about what was going on
the secrets of the temple your most
recent effort also national editor
Rolling Stone for the past five years
author of the book the education of
David Stockman and others that was
published by EF
Dutton based on an article in Atlantic
Monthly former assistant managing editor
of The Washington Post was with the post
for 14 years as a reporter and editor
and also the Washington bureau of the
Louisville courier-journal cover
politics for Rolling Stone written the
books have a preference well I have I
think probably what's the ideal life
where I get to do both
I mean I hope I get to do both if I'm
I'm an old newspaper reporter and the
idea of simply only doing books would I
think drive me nuts it's you want to be
in print you want to be closer to events
than that and in doing a column for
Rolling Stone gives me a a really
interesting broad national audience
that's quite different from a Washington
audience like the one I had at the post
so it's a nice mix you talk about the
news media in the book and you say about
their coverage of the fed you say the
news media rarely paid much attention to
what was said by the federal reserve
governors and if one judge of the
central bank is solely on the basis of
its uncritical press coverage the
Federal Reserve appeared to be the only
agency of government that never made
mistakes
the media's job of covering the Fed not
so good yeah I think so I'm sure there
are a lot of financial reporters who
will be offended by that but in part of
what I mean is that they don't they
don't make much of an effort to really
speak to the broader audience of
citizens about Fed policy if you read
The Wall Street Journal which is whose
coverage is the best of all for obvious
reasons it has it has excellent daily
coverage of monetary policy and you can
follow the arguments and so forth but it
even even the journal only makes
periodic attempts to say hey wait a
minute this is a much broader story than
whether M 1 is up or down or whether the
federal funds rate is rising or falling
and so forth it just that one example of
the speeches one of the things I did and
it was quite tedious but I've got
virtually every speech that all of these
governors had made and most of those
speeches are made to your academic
audiences or the financial group sort of
Business Assemblies of one kind or
another and it's true they are written
in the sort of dense and opaque language
of economists clouded with euphemisms so
forth and so on but if you read them
through very patiently and particularly
read them in series what did this guy
say six months ago and what is he saying
now it's very helpful and very
informative
so I would think the very least
newspapers ought to do is start covering
those speeches more more effectively
we've talked here today about Paul
Volcker but in your book you also talk
about the other other governors and
without your listing them by name and
tell us generally who are these people
what are their backgrounds well the
qualifications you know that they're
from the very beginning they've been
these wonderfully rich and sometimes
quite ugly conspiracy theories
surrounding the Federal Reserve is this
power center that runs the world or
that's part of the conspiracy for world
Dominion that goes back to the
Illuminati etc etc when you look at the
people who are Federal Reserve Board
governors what you discover is that most
of them with one or two exceptions have
come from somewhere in the Midwest that
went to a big Midwestern university
their father was may have been a mailman
or a plumber or an electrician or a YMCA
secretary I mean it's a wonderful sort
of American thing it seems to me that if
you're smart if you work hard and if you
get you know you have to you have to
punch the right tickets and so forth but
yes you can rise to a quite powerful
position and you don't have to come from
a wealthy banker family to get on the
Federal Reserve Board quite the contrary
your book wraps up with the so-called
Black Monday of last October with the
steep stock market decline do you
attribute that directly to the policies
of Paul Volcker in the Fed well I think
people will be arguing over this for the
rest of our lives probably but I think
if you say that the stock market crash
was was essentially a symptom of the
deeper disorders that we are now
confronted with which is I think the
right way to look at it and then you ask
all right what was a triggering event
that that that produced this shock and
and collapse of faith then I think the
Federal Reserve is a leading candidate
yes because it sounds too melodramatic
to be true but in fact it is true that
the Federal Reserve in the last two or
three years created the same pattern of
control over money that led to the crash
of 1929 and without going into the to
the complications of it two years ago
they let the money supply grow enormous
Lee partly because they they had no
choice unless they wanted to force a
recession which of course they didn't
want to do it 1985 I don't question
their judgment about that but money
supply flows balloons not much is
happening in the real economy of work
and production so it flows into
financial speculation that's the
beginning of this really wild run up
that Wall Street particularly in the
stock market then in 1986 the Fed tried
to take some of that liquidity out of
the economy out of the financial system
and money supply was held down in
September having held money growth very
low it raised the discount rate for the
first time in three years at the very
time the stock market was trying to go
up again and the real economy was coming
back and reviving those two things put
pressure on the total liquidity in the
in the economy people need more money
transactions or rising prices arising
blah blah blah so they're pulling back
at that same time and it's like a it's
like a traumatic effect on the stock
market and they're there a number of
astute market analysts who that's
exactly their diagnosis of what happened
nobody in politics much less the Federal
Reserve Board has yet addressed that
which I find fascinating right there I
think if we have a congressional hearing
six months or a year two years from now
which is what happened after 1929 that's
gonna be one of the leading theories
about what happened your book looks back
at the past eight years in an amazing
detail in the several minutes that we
have left let's look ahead
what would your recommendations be to
the administration to the Fed to keep
some of those problems from happening
again and what do you think will happen
down the road well I think I think we're
in Syria
we're in a grave economic crisis right
now and the first problem the first
danger is to avoid a recession and I
think people have an idea that well you
have a recession then you have another
recession there's so many weaken debtors
around not just our economy but the
world's particularly those LDC countries
with all that debt but if the u.s. goes
into a recession now it could get out of
control I don't know that it'll get out
of control I can't say that with with
but I think it's a risk we ought not
don't take so that's the first thing
then I think there's a much more general
reconstruction which is going to take
many years and and most people know all
of the elements of that of the debts the
the federal debt and the deficit raid
deficits and so forth I would add a
couple of others one is one is the MAL
distribution of incomes this is an old
idea that got learned in the 20s and
most everyone has forgotten but the fact
is when you have a long period of mal
distributing incomes that is the folks
at the top get a larger share and
everybody else gets a smaller share
eventually it erodes the strength of
your economy I think that's what's
happened in the last couple of years for
the Fed I would say you've got to invent
a system of coordination and
accountability and the best most direct
solution for that is to simply declare
that the Federal Reserve is a sub agency
of the Treasury Department make the
president responsible for it bring it
out into the open what's what's debate
about these things I'm not sure that any
of what I've just said is going to
happen
the book is secrets of the temple
published by Simon & Schuster 1987 on
bookshelves in time for the season the
author William Greider a national editor
at rolling stone also wrote that the
education of David Stockman and others
like a thank you for being with us thank
you
you've been watching an interview with
Rolling Stone reporter William Greider
this program will re-air later today at
6:30 p.m. Eastern 3:30 p.m. Pacific time